Priorities
1- Growing a  sustainable  economy
1.a- Growing and promoting our Leading Edge - 
Driving inward investment and business retention 
around our leading innovation, where key high 
value sectors are supported to invest, adapt, 
and contribute to our ambitions. 
1.b- Creating and sustaining Quality Places – 
Through a new model of place leadership, reimagined 
local high streets and business and employment hubs 
become more economically and socially vibrant.
1.c- Maximising Opportunities – Supporting the creation 
of new and better jobs, coordinating skills provision, 
bringing more people into work and supporting residents 
to reach their potential whilst helping to reduce social, 
economic and health inequality.
1.d- Delivering Economic Infrastructure – Communities 
are well-connected both in terms of a seamless, safe, 
sustainable, active and accessible transport network 
and through digital infrastructure that links residents 
to the places that they live in, work in and enjoy. 


2- Tackling health inequality

2.a - Physically healthy - Preventing physical ill health, 
promoting physical well being and living independently 
for as long as possible, especially those experiencing 
multiple disadvantage.
2.b - Mental and emotional wellness – Adults, young 
people and children access the right early help and 
parents/ caregivers are supported; social isolation 
is prevented and environments/ communities build 
good mental health.
2.c - Reaching potential - People’s basic needs are met 
and thrive, with services engaging in partnership 
action to address the wider determinants of health 
and supporting community-led action
2.d - Safe - Children, families and adults that most need us 
are protected and can access the services to enable 
them to feel secure from health risks and live well.


3- Enabling a greener future

3.a - A zero carbon council, leading on the 
Greener Futures priorities - SCC is a carbon neutral 
council by 2030 by reducing emissions, positively 
impacting the environment through our services, 
operations and land management and improving 
efficiency from across our services including buildings, 
fleet, and street lighting.
3.b - Enabling the development of Greener Futures 
Communities that support green behaviours to meet 
Surrey’s 2050 net zero carbon target - Residents 
and businesses are enabled to play their part in 
delivering Greener Futures through: improving their local 
environment; consuming more sustainably; reducing 
emissions and waste and fostering a thriving green, 
low carbon and circular economy.
3.c - Clean and zero carbon infrastructure and development
- Reduced pollution and increased efficiencies from 
energy, transport and infrastructure resulting in improved 
health and wellbeing outcomes for residents, a greener 
economy and supporting nature recovery.
3.d - A thriving and biodiverse urban and rural natural 
environment that supports - Accessible, inclusive 
and high quality green and blue spaces that benefit 
our residents mental and physical wellbeing; natural 
environment solutions such as capturing carbon and 
natural flood risk management and nature recovering 
and protects biodiversity.
3.e- Climate change resilience - Communities, Infrastructure 
and developments are resilient and adapting to the 
changing climate with the most vulnerable protected 
from the impacts of extreme weather events with 
minimised disruption.

4- Empowering communities

4.a - Accessibility and inclusion – All residents are able to 
access the information, support and services they need 
at the right time and in the right way, so they can make 
informed choices.
4.b - Greater influence – People of all ages and backgrounds 
are able to influence SCC priorities, with approaches 
in place that enable communities to participate more 
and shape our services and practices.

4.c - Prevention and early intervention – People of all 
ages and family units can exercise greater control over 
their own and their communities’ health and wellbeing, 
with any support provided earlier and a reduction 
in crisis events.

4.d - Community cohesion and place shaping – 
More residents feel connected to their local community, 
with the confidence and tools to support others and 
set and deliver local priorities.

4.e - Transforming how we work – A more equal relationship 
with communities, doing with and not to, through 
equipping our staff with the skills to work alongside 
communities and partners as part of joined-up 
services across Surrey
