Joanna Killian: ‘AI could be the solution to the workforce crisis’
Local government should help set the ethical framework for using the new technology, a top chief believes

With workforce issues presenting local government with an “almost existential” challenge, one experienced chief believes the solution could lie in a fast-developing but controversial area: artificial intelligence.

Surrey CC chief executive Joanna Killian is the new chair of the Association of County Chief Executives, and told LGC it was a topic her colleagues “talked a lot about” when they met at their annual CEO retreat last month.

For her, the workforce challenge is now “as bad as I’ve ever seen it” and represents an “almost existential” issue for the sector.

While national news coverage has focused on difficulties finding children’s and adults care workers, for her it is much more all-encompassing.

“We are all struggling to see how we will manage this,” she says. “The workforce issues are in every sort of team, from lawyers to IT people. It’s really difficult. And I think the best of us have tried almost every­thing, including thinking about how we use apprenticeships, work with the private sector, but even if outsourcing is an option that capability isn’t there either.”

Having tried almost everything, AI is now firmly on the agenda. Ms Killian says the discussions were around “thinking this is going to have to be the solution for the future. Controlled, responsive, controllable artificial intelligence could make a difference on some of the processing we do where, again, we just can’t find the workers to do it.”

She cites prefectures in Japan that have used AI to help address workforce issues, and mulls how AI could help devise school transport routes in milliseconds and help process education, health and care plans (EHCPs).

It is an area where private sector companies are making huge strides – the release of ChatGTP has pushed AI to the forefront of popular debate – but do local authorities need to have a bigger role in creating the ethical framework in which these technologies will operate?

“Sometimes, as a sector, we’re just one half-step behind,” Ms Killian says. “Sometimes it’s being brave enough to be able to say, ‘right, we are going to dedicate a bit of capacity to think this through. We will invest in the moral and ethical conversations and then blooming go for it,’ because I can’t see what the alternative is.”

Another huge concern for her and her fellow county chiefs is the growth in children and families seeking help with special educational and additional needs and waiting for an EHCP.

She says: “I hate talking about money in relation to this, but the demand is exceptionally high. We’re not well funded and the practical reality is there aren’t enough educational psychologists, specialist workers, to put the plan together, let alone enough services or places to buy specialist support from.”

It is an area where “we need to keep talking to government”.

And for Ms Killian, housing looms large as an issue driving some of the big challenges the sector is grappling with. In some places, housing costs play a big role in the workforce crisis, forcing public sector staff to move elsewhere. And when the cost of living crisis is discussed, she warns that long-term structural issues such as the increasing gap between average wages and the cost of housing mean that even when inflation falls, household budgets will still be under enormous pressure.

As recent parliamentary by-elections and unrest from backbench Conservative MPs have shown, concern in local communities about new developments can be a powerful force. For Ms Killian, local government should be trying to win hearts and minds.

“I do think councils have to play a strong influencing role to encourage communities to welcome the value of additional housing in their places, on good sites with infrastructure that can support them,” she says.

The local government funding system has long been a cause of complaint within the sector, and while successive local government ministers have talked about reform, delivering it has proved another matter. But with a general election coming ever closer, what are the biggest things Ms Killian would want the next government to change?

For a start, clarity about the future of adult social care reforms and its funding mechanism “is really essential,” as well as fixing the mechanism to deliver the 2014 Send reforms – especially at a time of rising demand and “a market that doesn’t work”. And she asks: “Will there ever be a fair funding review?”

But more than that, she wants a funding system that incentivises growth.

“As local authorities, we’ve got to be part of the engine of growth across the country and make sure where we are as a place is where businesses can invest and invest well, and their workers can have housing and proper infrastructure. My fantasy would be a funding mechanism that incentivises us all to deliver that.”

While she cites business rates retention as one mechanism to encourage growth, she wants to see a coherent bigger picture: “There are lots of levers and tools in isolation, but what’s the strategy and the long game to understand how in a place all these incentives work for us, but also work for business – a regime that’s much more simple and transparent?”

It is another area where Ms Killian sees housing as an essential part: “Again, what are the incentives for all of us that would encourage the development of housing: up front mechanisms to fund infrastructure, a different relationship with developers, and understanding there are brownfield sites we can still develop?”

The creation of the Office for Local Government has been a cause of concern for some in the sector, but Ms Killian says “we should worry less about Oflog”.

She wants the sector to have a conversation about how it “truly understands” how well it is doing, and how individual chief executives can be “absolutely sure our organisations are functioning properly”.

Therefore, she adds: “I would welcome a debate with Oflog about the signs and signals we should all be paying attention to, to help us govern and lead our organisations.”

It sometimes seems as if any ministerial mention of Oflog must be accompanied by an assurance that it won’t be a repeat of the Audit Commission, whose abolition was one of the first announcements of the coalition government in 2010.

Ms Killian has an unusual vantage point from which to judge the commission, having helped deliver the first round of local government audit assessments in 2002 when she worked for it. She points to two things it did well.

She misses the district auditor role - “an individual who stayed alongside the council, knew the leadership well, understood much more deeply the financial management issues, could understand the risks”. Now, instead of the “really good” conversations about how corporate governance was working, “we’ve got an audit regime that is stripped back, and much more technical”.

And she points to current council failures she attributes to the relationship between members and the statutory officers “just failing”. She adds: “I think some of the corporate governance work the Audit Commission did to test that was really powerful, and I think led to some really important improvements in the sector.”

Last month saw the creation of four new unitary councils, all of which have joined the County Councils Network. Is this part of a wider trend that will see many more unitaries in 10 years’ time?

“I can’t see that at the moment,” Ms Killian says. “I think many more of us are genuinely interested in a devolution framework, and many of us want those levers and flexibilities, because we want growth.

“I see the super deals that have been developed in Greater Manchester and the West Midlands and am incredibly envious. And what I think is really important is we’ve all got to get into a devolution space, because otherwise the powers [are] so patchy and differential for our residents, which I just don’t think is fair.”
