Our objectives
A high performing council
As we continue to deliver activities and services that contribute towards the ten outcomes set out in the 2030 Vision – with our emphasis being around our guiding mission of 'No One Left Behind' – we will also strive to maintain a position as a high performing council. To be a truly outstanding council we must have a meaningful impact on the lives of all Surrey residents, and we achieve that with focus on four priority objectives, delivering excellence in our services, and continually improving our organisational capability.

Four priority objectives
The ambitious 2030 Vision for the county requires us to work closely with residents, businesses and our wider partners to prioritise our activity and resources on the outcomes that matter most to residents and will have the biggest impact on improving people's quality of life. Therefore, we focus on a small number of priority objectives that will let us create the conditions for everyone in Surrey to thrive.

Our Organisation Strategy (2023 to 2028), sets out four priority objectives which reflect where we think we can have the greatest impact on tackling inequality and improving outcomes for people living and working in the county:

Growing a sustainable economy so everyone can benefit
We want to create the conditions for sustainable economic growth within Surrey, to maintain the county's position as the strongest economy outside of London and ensure all residents can benefit as a result. Economic growth has a vital role to play in improving the health and wellbeing of residents and general living standards.

We will take an active role in growing Surrey's economy, through supporting innovation and ensuring Surrey remains an attractive place to live and do business. We will work with partners and the business community to help align skills provision with businesses needs so that residents are able to access employment opportunities and businesses can thrive.

Surrey has a strong economy with highly skilled residents, however its affluence masks inequalities, pockets of deprivation and growing disparity between East and West. We will proactively tackle economic inequality across the county to make sure economic growth is inclusive and something that everyone can benefit from.

Tackling health inequality
Helping residents to stay healthy and well is key to improving residents' quality of life and tackling inequality of life expectancy. Most of Surrey's population lead happy and healthy lives, however this isn't the case for all residents. Surrey has a growing and ageing population with more people likely to be living in worse health in their later years. The impacts of the pandemic have widened existing inequalities across physical, mental and social health (for example issues of loneliness). Physical and mental health are often viewed in isolation, however each can directly impact upon the other. Preventing poor physical and mental wellbeing is key to maintaining good outcomes in Surrey whilst helping to close the gap and reduce inequalities for adults and children alike.

We will drive work across the system to reduce these widening health inequalities, ensuring the safety and wellbeing of our residents is at the forefront of our strategies and accelerating health and social care integration to respond to new demands. We will build on the strengths that residents have in their families and networks, supporting them to be independent at home so they stay connected to their communities and feel safe.

Enabling a greener future
We want to ensure that Surrey remains an attractive place full of opportunities, offering clean, safe and green communities. To do this we must tackle the causes of climate change and accelerate reductions in carbon emissions enough to meet our net zero carbon target by 2050. If current consumption continues, Surrey will use up its share of the global carbon budget – the total carbon emissions the world can 'afford' if it is to avoid dangerous climate change – within eight years. We need to do better.

We will build on behaviour changes and lessons learnt during Covid-19 lockdown to address environmental challenges, improve air quality and focus on green energy. Working with residents and our business community, we will encourage more decisive steps to reduce journeys, shift to an increased use of public and active transport modes, and accelerate the uptake of zero emission vehicle options.

Through Surrey's Climate Change Strategy we will work with people, organisations and businesses in the county to help them fulfil their responsibilities and be mindful of their impact on their local environment.

Empowered and thriving communities
We want to reinvigorate our relationship with residents, characterised by more people participating, engaging and having a role and say in how things are done on matters that impact them and where they live. We know that thriving communities are essential to meeting future challenges across the county. Compassionate and connected communities improve our quality of life and our life expectancy – they enable people to be independent and are essential to reducing health inequalities. Strong communities help grow sustainable local economies and tackle the causes of climate change.

To achieve this, we will continue to develop new approaches to local engagement and operational delivery that bring residents together with local government, other public services and broader partners to decide priorities, tackle local issues and grasp opportunities within communities across Surrey.

Service effectiveness
Our primary duty as a council is to deliver high-quality and sustainable services for all. Our services aim to support people to live independently and well in their communities, ensure children and families reach their full potential, protect Surrey's residents and businesses, and take care of Surrey's environment and highways.

Providing excellent services is also the bedrock of what we do as a council, underpinning our success in delivering against the four priority objectives. Firstly, they are a fundamental component to No One Left Behind, as the majority who depend on our services are also the most 'in need' or vulnerable in our county. But additionally, our core services are the activities on which everything else in the council is built around – this activity is what residents and regulators measure us on first and their quality and impact speaks to the reputation of any other activity we seek to undertake as a council.

To achieve service effectiveness, our approach will always be focused on impact. Service design and service delivery will start and end with how to attain the best outcomes for residents. We are building processes that are consultative and responsive to define need and understand how needs change, as well as building resilience while change occurs outside our control. As taxpayer-funded services, we will achieve excellence through efficiency and being judicious about the resources we have available.

Truly effective services are also on a constant progressive improvement journey. Core service areas will be continually seeking to change processes to enable more preventative interventions, make best use of digital technology, and find new ways of working with our partners. This journey relies on data and feedback from residents and partners to help us be a trusted, ethical, accessible service provider

Organisational effectiveness
We want to be constantly improving our organisational health, helping us to deliver against our ambitions across our services and our priority objectives. To achieve this, we are transforming how Our Organisation operates and the culture and behaviours Our People embody. Progress here will help the council become more resilient, add more value, make a greater impact and improve services so they deliver the best possible long-term outcomes for residents while balancing our budget and better managing demand.

The goal is to be a trustworthy organisation which continues to be open and transparent about its intent, boundaries, changes in circumstances, and results. Strategic decisions will be made with better understanding of the context and with greater alignment of competing interests at an earlier stage. These decisions can then be solutions-focused, rather than process-driven, and more dedicated to eventual outcomes for residents.

Transforming our organisation is key to delivering our contribution to the 2030 Vision, and fundamentally reforming the function, form and focus of the council.

Following our values as an organisation, this transformation will help everyone at the council be more collaborative internally and externally. This in turn will reduce duplication, enable more efficient planning, drive better investment and value for money, and present opportunities for earlier risk mitigation. We will also foster an inclusive organisational culture where everyone is constantly learning, being open, providing better customer service and taking accountability for delivering great results.

This transformation around how our organisation operates has four principles which guide us:

We organise ourselves around outcomes and make it easy for others across Surrey to collaborate with us.
We help people and communities to help themselves and devolve decisions and service design as close to them as we can.
We maximise the potential of digital and data to transform the way we work and improve accessibility.
We seek out preventative, commercial and efficient approaches to help us be financially sustainable.
The transformation around the culture and behaviours our people embody also has four workforce outcomes we will focus on delivering:

An inclusive and compassionate place where we value diversity and can be ourselves at work.
A collaborative and inviting place where we are open, trust each other, and work as one.
An ambitious and outcomes-focused place where we are passionate about our purpose and take accountability for delivering great results.
An inventive and dynamic place where we promote a learning mindset and adapt to new insights and opportunities.
