Our impact
Measuring impact
Success is determined by the collective ability of public sector organisations, the voluntary, community and faith sector, businesses and residents to achieve the outcomes set out in the 2030 Vision. Each individual organisation has a responsibility to contribute towards achieving the outcomes, but success will be a result of our combined efforts. Knowing if we are making the progress we all want to see will rely upon regular and accountable performance monitoring.

The council is committed to monitoring how we make decisions, operate, and perform against the principles and commitments set out to be a high performing council. We will continually seek to gather performance data to help us develop insights, learn lessons, and be more transparent to our residents and partners. Performance monitoring will include quantitative and qualitative measurement of performance on core service delivery, organisational effectiveness, and achievements under the priority objectives, and this measurement will directly inform primary council functions like the budget process.

Outcomes framework
To be really clear on the difference we want to make from each of our priority objectives, we have created the Outcomes Framework. Each outcome is a change that we want to see in Surrey. The outcomes will help us to plan our activities and measure progress in each of the four priority objectives.

Growing a sustainable economy so everyone can benefit
Growing and promoting our leading edge – driving inward investment and business retention around our leading innovation, where key high value sectors are supported to invest, adapt, and contribute to our ambitions.
Creating and sustaining quality places – through a new model of place leadership, reimagined local high streets and business and employment hubs to become more economically and socially vibrant.
Maximising opportunities – supporting the creation of new and better jobs, coordinating skills provision, bringing more people into work and supporting residents to reach their potential whilst helping to reduce social, economic and health inequality.
Delivering economic infrastructure – communities are well-connected both in terms of a seamless, safe, sustainable, active and accessible transport network and through digital infrastructure that links residents to the places that they live in, work in and enjoy.
Tackling health inequality
Physically healthy – preventing physical ill health, promoting physical wellbeing and living independently for as long as possible, especially those experiencing multiple disadvantage.
Mental and emotional wellness – adults, young people and children access the right early help and parents/ caregivers are supported; social isolation is prevented and environments/ communities build good mental health.
Reaching potential – people's basic needs are met and thrive, with services engaging in partnership action to address the wider determinants of health and supporting community-led action
Safe – children, families and adults that most need us are protected and can access the services to enable them to feel secure from health risks and live well
Enabling a greener future
A zero-carbon council, leading on the greener futures priorities – SCC is a carbon neutral council by 2030 by reducing emissions, positively impacting the environment through our services, operations and land management and improving efficiency from across our services including buildings, fleet, and street lighting.
Enabling the development of greener futures communities that support green behaviours to meet Surrey's 2050 net zero carbon target – residents and businesses are enabled to play their part in delivering greener futures through: improving their local environment; consuming more sustainably; reducing emissions and waste and fostering a thriving green, low carbon and circular economy.
Clean and zero carbon infrastructure and development – reduced pollution and increased efficiencies from energy, transport and infrastructure resulting in improved health and wellbeing outcomes for residents, a greener economy and supporting nature recovery.
A thriving and biodiverse urban and rural natural environment – supporting accessible, inclusive and high quality green and blue spaces that benefit our residents mental and physical wellbeing; natural environment solutions such as capturing carbon and natural flood risk management and nature recovering and protects biodiversity.
Climate change resilience – communities, Infrastructure and developments are resilient and adapting to the changing climate with the most vulnerable protected from the impacts of extreme weather events with minimised disruption.
Empowered and thriving communities
Accessibility and inclusion – all residents are able to access the information, support and services they need at the right time and in the right way, so they can make informed choices.
Greater influence – people of all ages and backgrounds are able to influence council priorities, with approaches in place that enable communities to participate more and shape our services and practices.
Prevention and early intervention – people of all ages and family units can exercise greater control over their own and their communities' health and wellbeing, with any support provided earlier and a reduction in crisis events
Community cohesion and place shaping – more residents feel connected to their local community, with the confidence and tools to support others and set and deliver local priorities.
Transforming how we work – a more equal relationship with communities, doing with and not to, through equipping our staff with the skills to work alongside communities and partners as part of joined-up services across Surrey.
