The Surrey Way explains the way we do things at the council. It breaks down our ambitions and objectives, and provides us with a clearer, more joined up picture of what our ways of working should be across three key areas:

The 3 parts
Use this guide to see how your work fits into the bigger picture.

1- Our purpose - what we are trying to achieve, our vision and priorities
2- Our organisation - what sort of organisation we need to be to achieve our purpose
3- Our people - what culture and behaviours we will need to live in order to support this


1- Our purpose and mission 
No one left behind
Our purpose as a council is to tackle inequality and make sure that no one is left behind.

This purpose flows from the Community Vision for Surrey 2030. Created with residents, communities and partners, it sets out how we all want Surrey to be by 2030. The Council plays a big part in the joint effort to realise this vision through the delivery of services and through partnerships such as the Health and Wellbeing Board.  

Our purpose should inform our decisions and all that we do in our work. No matter what your role, your input will help us to meet our aims. Your work may directly help us to reach 1 or more of our 4 priorities. Or it may help us to be a high performing council, delivering excellent council services for all.

A high-performing council- excellent services for all
Our main duty as a council is to deliver high-quality and sustainable services for all, with a focus on supporting our most vulnerable residents.

Transforming how our organisation operates and the culture and behaviours our people embody will enable us to add more value, make a greater impact and improve services so they deliver the best possible long-term outcomes for residents while balancing our budget and better managing demand.

Equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI)
EDI is at the heart of how we are going to deliver on our organisational purpose; it is how we will deliver on the promise of ‘no one left behind’.

In order to improve equality of opportunity for our residents, we need services that understand the diversity of needs in our communities and have the right staff in post to deliver them in inclusive ways. This is the right thing to do, and it will make our services more effective, efficient and responsive.

We work to 4 equality objectives and have an annual EDI action plan that helps us measure the progress we are making. We are developing a longer-term EDI Strategy that will help us continue to develop this work alongside the Community Vision for Surrey.


Organisation strategy
Our Organisation Strategy 2023-2028 reinforces our commitment to no one left behind and sets out our 4 priorities.

These reflect where we think we can most improve outcomes for people in Surrey: 

Our Guiding Mission:
No one left behind


Priorities
1- Growing a  sustainable  economy
1.a- Growing and promoting our Leading Edge - 
Driving inward investment and business retention 
around our leading innovation, where key high 
value sectors are supported to invest, adapt, 
and contribute to our ambitions. 
1.b- Creating and sustaining Quality Places – 
Through a new model of place leadership, reimagined 
local high streets and business and employment hubs 
become more economically and socially vibrant.
1.c- Maximising Opportunities – Supporting the creation 
of new and better jobs, coordinating skills provision, 
bringing more people into work and supporting residents 
to reach their potential whilst helping to reduce social, 
economic and health inequality.
1.d- Delivering Economic Infrastructure – Communities 
are well-connected both in terms of a seamless, safe, 
sustainable, active and accessible transport network 
and through digital infrastructure that links residents 
to the places that they live in, work in and enjoy. 


2- Tackling health inequality

2.a - Physically healthy - Preventing physical ill health, 
promoting physical well being and living independently 
for as long as possible, especially those experiencing 
multiple disadvantage.
2.b - Mental and emotional wellness – Adults, young 
people and children access the right early help and 
parents/ caregivers are supported; social isolation 
is prevented and environments/ communities build 
good mental health.
2.c - Reaching potential - People’s basic needs are met 
and thrive, with services engaging in partnership 
action to address the wider determinants of health 
and supporting community-led action
2.d - Safe - Children, families and adults that most need us 
are protected and can access the services to enable 
them to feel secure from health risks and live well.


3- Enabling a greener future

3.a - A zero carbon council, leading on the 
Greener Futures priorities - SCC is a carbon neutral 
council by 2030 by reducing emissions, positively 
impacting the environment through our services, 
operations and land management and improving 
efficiency from across our services including buildings, 
fleet, and street lighting.
3.b - Enabling the development of Greener Futures 
Communities that support green behaviours to meet 
Surrey’s 2050 net zero carbon target - Residents 
and businesses are enabled to play their part in 
delivering Greener Futures through: improving their local 
environment; consuming more sustainably; reducing 
emissions and waste and fostering a thriving green, 
low carbon and circular economy.
3.c - Clean and zero carbon infrastructure and development
- Reduced pollution and increased efficiencies from 
energy, transport and infrastructure resulting in improved 
health and wellbeing outcomes for residents, a greener 
economy and supporting nature recovery.
3.d - A thriving and biodiverse urban and rural natural 
environment that supports - Accessible, inclusive 
and high quality green and blue spaces that benefit 
our residents mental and physical wellbeing; natural 
environment solutions such as capturing carbon and 
natural flood risk management and nature recovering 
and protects biodiversity.
3.e- Climate change resilience - Communities, Infrastructure 
and developments are resilient and adapting to the 
changing climate with the most vulnerable protected 
from the impacts of extreme weather events with 
minimised disruption.

4- Empowering communities

4.a - Accessibility and inclusion – All residents are able to 
access the information, support and services they need 
at the right time and in the right way, so they can make 
informed choices.
4.b - Greater influence – People of all ages and backgrounds 
are able to influence SCC priorities, with approaches 
in place that enable communities to participate more 
and shape our services and practices.

4.c - Prevention and early intervention – People of all 
ages and family units can exercise greater control over 
their own and their communities’ health and wellbeing, 
with any support provided earlier and a reduction 
in crisis events.

4.d - Community cohesion and place shaping – 
More residents feel connected to their local community, 
with the confidence and tools to support others and 
set and deliver local priorities.

4.e - Transforming how we work – A more equal relationship 
with communities, doing with and not to, through 
equipping our staff with the skills to work alongside 
communities and partners as part of joined-up 
services across Surrey


2- Our organisation - what sort of organisation do we want to be?

Our organisation’s ways of working shapes how we work and how we organise ourselves.

We organise ourselves around outcomes and make it easy for others across Surrey to collaborate with us
Use the Outcomes Framework to help shape your work based on the positive outcomes we want to achieve.

We help people and communities to help themselves and devolve decisions and service design as close to them as we can
The ‘Make it Happen’ campaign is a great example.

We maximise the potential of digital and data to transform the way we work and improve accessibility
For example, check out the Digital Skills Curriculum or the SCC Data Strategy

We seek out preventative, commercial and efficient approaches to help us be financially sustainable


3- Our people - what culture and behaviours will we need?
These are our cultural outcomes, and they describe how it should feel to work at SCC. They sit alongside the values which show what we care about.​​​​​​​ Our People Strategy enables us to deliver our Organisation Strategy by empowering our people to reach their full potential. The Delivery Plan sets out how we will achieve our cultural outcomes by developing our workforce.

We are an inclusive and compassionate place where we value diversity and can be ourselves at work
Being an inclusive employer is crucial to helping us deliver on our Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) goals. More information can be found at the EDI Hub.

We are a collaborative and inviting place where we are open, trust each other, and work as one
A good example of this is our focus on being an Agile Organisation.

We are an ambitious and outcomes-focused place where we are passionate about our purpose and take accountability for delivering great results.
You can see how we measure results at our Performance Hub.

We are an inventive and dynamic place where we promote a learning mindset and adapt to new insights and opportunities
Check out the Learning and Development Hub which brings together L&D resources and opportunities together into one place


