Structured Peer Group Supervision for Novice
Consultants: Procedures, Pitfalls, and
Potential
DANIEL S. NEWMAN
National Louis University
ALLISON J. NEBBERGALL
KIPP New Orleans Schools
DIANE SALMON
National Louis University
Supervision is considered a keystone instructional tool in school
psychology and has been argued to be an essential feature of
effective consultation training. However, descriptive data suggest
that supervision is not always incorporated as part of consultation
training. In this article the application of a structured peer group
supervision (SPGS) model in preservice training of novice consultants is described, including specific case-related concerns worked
on during SPGS sessions. The article concludes with a discussion
of the promise of an SPGS model in consultation training and
considerations for future research regarding its effectiveness.
Supervision is considered a keystone pedagogical tool in the helping professions (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009). The field of school psychology is no
exception. In fact, in a recent position statement on supervision in school
psychology, the National Association of School Psychologists (NASP; 2011)
Correspondence should be sent to Daniel S. Newman, Educational Psychology, National
Louis University, 5202 Old Orchard Road, Room 416, Skokie, IL 60077-4409. E-mail: Daniel.
newman@nl.edu
200Structured Peer Group Supervision 201
advocated for ‘‘the professional supervision of school psychologists by school
psychologists at all levels of practice (e.g., student, intern, early career, and
expert) as a means of ensuring effective practices to support the educational
attainment of all children’’ (p. 1). The need for supervision in school psychology practice is further emphasized in the NASP Professional Standards
(2010), a set of four documents intended to inform graduate education,
credentialing, professional practices, and ethical behavior of school psychologists. For instance, in NASP’s Model for Comprehensive and Integrated
School Psychological Services document, Supervision and Mentoring is designated as a critical feature for organizations employing school psychologists;
guidance regarding supervisor credentials and supervision processes are also
provided.
However, data regarding supervision practices in school psychology (at
preservice, internship, and inservice levels) appear to contradict assertions
regarding supervision’s importance. For example, descriptive studies have
demonstrated (a) limited availability and perceived insufficiency of clinical supervision for practicing school psychologists (Chafouleas, Clonan, &
Vanauken, 2002; Curtis, Castillo, & Gelley, 2012; Fischetti & Crespi, 1999);
(b) a lack of supervision techniques other than case consultation (i.e., talking
about cases) predominately applied by supervisors (Cochrane, Salyers, &
Ding, 2010; Romans, Boswell, Carlozzi, & Ferguson, 1995; Ward, 2001);
and (c) supervisors (both field and university) not having completed supervision coursework, ongoing professional development on supervision,
or formal metasupervision (i.e., supervision of supervision; Cochrane et al.,
2010; Ward, 2001). A number of factors may account for the gap between
the purported value of supervision and what is actually practiced, including
complexity in defining and researching supervision (Knoff, 1986; McIntosh &
Phelps, 2000). Moreover, much of what we claim to know about supervision
in school psychology is largely informed from research in other mental health
fields such as Clinical Psychology, Psychotherapy, and Social Work (e.g., see
Bernard & Goodyear, 2009).
Consistent with the field of school psychology as a whole, the provision
of supervision in school consultation is argued to be critical (Cramer &
Rosenfield, 2003; Harvey & Struzziero, 2008; Newman, 2012b; Rosenfield,
Levinsohn-Klyap, & Cramer, 2010), yet research and practice in this area
remain deficient (e.g., see Anton-LaHart & Rosenfield, 2004). Nonetheless,
a popular opinion that has permeated the consultation literature is that
consultation skills are not learned on the fly; intensive, strategic, and developmentally focused training including supervision is argued to be essential
in supporting the development of competent consultants (Rosenfield, 2012;
Rosenfield et al., 2010; Ysseldyke, Burns, & Rosenfield, 2009). Some recent
research studies have provided support for the importance of consultation training (e.g., Arra, 2010; Newell, 2010a, 2010b, 2012) and supervision
(Newman, 2012a).202 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
In this article we present a structured peer group supervision (SPGS)
model for novice consultants in training (CITs) and describe its application
at nondoctoral and doctoral levels of consultation training. In so doing, our
purposes are to (a) provide a structure that can be immediately applied by
consultation trainers and CITs to augment the effectiveness of consultation
training and (b) open a new potential avenue to extend upon consultation
training and supervision research. To begin, we briefly define and describe
supervision in school psychology including prevalent models, techniques,
and formats. Specific attention is given to SPGS, including the delineation
of an adapted model. Next, using specific examples from our incorporation
of the model in consultation training, we describe how the model can be
instructed and applied at nondoctoral and doctoral levels and in small and
large groups. The article concludes with a discussion of the promise of an
SPGS model in consultation training and considerations for future research
regarding its effectiveness.
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY
Broadly defined, supervision in school psychology is ‘‘an interpersonal interaction between two or more individuals for the purpose of sharing knowledge, assessing professional competencies, and providing objective feedback
with the terminal goals of developing new competencies, facilitating effective
delivery of psychological services, and maintaining professional competencies’’ (McIntosh & Phelps, 2000, pp. 33–34). Unlike related fields, school
psychology is embedded within a complex educational context, which may
require unique contextual considerations in supervision (Crespi & Dube,
2005; Harvey & Pearrow, 2010; Harvey & Struzziero, 2008). Because the
McIntosh and Phelps (2000) definition of supervision is broad, it may be
considered inclusive of a variety of supervision models, techniques, and
formats that may be applied by supervisors in support of trainees and practitioners.
Models
Harvey and Struzziero (2008) argued that ‘‘the structure of clinical supervision
profoundly influences its potential to be effective’’ (p. 182). The structure of
supervision is in large part informed by a supervisor’s theoretical orientation
and choice of supervision model. In the general psychology supervision
literature, there exist countless models of supervision such as (a) those
rooted in psychotherapy (e.g., psychodynamic, person-centered, cognitivebehavioral), (b) developmental models (both stage-based and processdriven), and (c) social role models (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009). AlthoughStructured Peer Group Supervision 203
a number of models have been discussed in school psychology supervision
literature there is no evidence to suggest one model is superior to others
(Kaufman, 2010).
Techniques
Supervision is also constructed via techniques (also called methods or interventions) applied by supervisors. The choice of techniques is informed
by the supervisor’s orientation and model as well as supervision goals and
supervisee developmental level (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009). Examples of
techniques include case consultation, cofacilitation of activities, live observation, audio/videotaping, role playing, supervisor modeling/supervisee rehearsal, and written information (e.g., process notes, progress notes, and
transcription). Even though a number of techniques may be relevant to apply,
supervisors do not always select a wide range of strategies or implement the
ones they view as most effective (Romans et al., 1995). For a further description of supervisory techniques, including advantages and disadvantages, the
reader is referred to Harvey and Struzziero (2008).
Formats
Individual supervision. Individual supervision is the most commonly
applied format, consisting of one supervisor working with one supervisee.
This format is potentially the most time consuming to apply; however, it
allows for differentiation of supervision to meet the unique needs of the
supervisee and allows for close evaluation of progress toward supervision
goals. An alternate way to provide individual supervision that may be more
time efficient is in a small group during which the supervisor works with
each supervisee individually in a round-robin fashion (Harvey & Struzziero,
2008).
Group supervision. Group supervision is the ongoing meeting of a group
of supervisees with a supervisor or supervisors during which ‘‘supervisees are
aided in achieving [their] goals by their supervisor(s) and by their feedback
from and interactions with each other’’ (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009, p. 244).
Supervision can be provided to the group as a whole regarding common
issues or individually within the group setting (Harvey & Struzziero, 2008).
Even though there exists a wide range of potential variability in the structure
of group supervision (Mastoras & Andrews, 2011), Harvey and Struzziero
(2008) offered some guiding principles. Group size should be limited to
between four and eight participants and supervisee developmental levels
and topics of interest should be relatively homogeneous. In addition, the
authors suggest that having a group structure for presenting and discussing
cases and supervisor provision of feedback can be helpful.204 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
Peer group supervision. Peer group supervision is a type of group supervision that is nonhierarchical; such groups are leaderless (Counselman &
Weber, 2004), participants have comparable levels of experience, and supervision does not include a formal evaluation process (Bernard & Goodyear,
2009). Zins and Murphy (1996) investigated what they called ‘‘peer support
groups’’ in school psychology. Analogous to peer supervision groups, Zins
and Murphy defined peer support groups as ‘‘a small group of professionals
with a common area of interest who meet periodically to learn together, to
share their expertise, and to support one another in their ongoing professional development’’ (p. 176). The authors conceptualized such groups as a
form of embedded professional development for school psychologists and
found that 64% of respondents (n D 399) reported prior or current participation in such a group. Perceived benefits of peer support groups included
improved skills in providing specific psychological services, expanded range
of services offered, increased enthusiasm for the job, increased use of accountability measures, increased involvement in professional organizations,
and increased knowledge base in school psychology. Of their participants,
93% expressed a moderate or higher level of interest in becoming part of a
peer group.
Clearly, peer support is perceived to be of benefit at the inservice level.
This may be due in part to the fact that other types of supervisory support are
not always available to school psychologists once they enter the field. For
example, Zins and Murphy (1996) found that of their respondents, only 14%
received individual clinical supervision. However, it seems that school psychology practitioners do not always access peer support. In the most recent
NASP member survey, Curtis et al. (2012) found that only 56.2% of the fulltime school psychologist respondents received administrative supervision
(i.e., focused on administrative issues vs. clinical skills), and only 28.5% reported systematic professional support, mentoring, and/or peer supervision.
Perhaps a gap exists regarding how to best access peer support.
Structured peer group supervision (SPGS). Some authors have suggested
that group and peer group supervision may be most effective when implemented with a formal structure. For example, Borders (1991) described a
systematic approach to group supervision that she applied over 6 years with
90 counselors-in-training. Groups include three to six supervisees with a
trained supervisor acting in the role of moderator and process observer.
Although Borders described the model as ‘‘peer group supervision,’’ it does
not seem to be leaderless and includes a supervisor who formatively assesses
developmental levels of supervisees. Even though the Borders model is
not necessarily a pure peer group model according to formal definitions,
peers do take an active role in supporting one another, and preparation for
supervision is seen to be critical in the supervision process.
Steps described by Borders (1991) include (a) supervisees identifying
questions/concerns about their videotaped counseling work and requestingStructured Peer Group Supervision 205
feedback; (b) peer supervisors choosing or being assigned roles, perspectives, or tasks for when they review the presenter’s tape (e.g., observing
communication skills or nonverbal behaviors, taking the perspective of the
client, or other variations); (c) presentation of a video segment; (d) provision
of feedback from peer supervisors through the lens of assigned roles or
perspectives; (e) discussion facilitated by the supervisor; (f) summary by the
supervisor; and (g) the supervisee indicating if his or her needs were met by
the supervision. The Borders model has also been adapted to incorporate
multicultural considerations, adding a group member role for observing/
providing feedback on cultural issues at the second step and encouraging
an increased multicultural focus from the supervisor throughout the process
(Lassiter, Napolitano, Culbreth, & Ng, 2008).
Wilbur, Roberts-Wilbur, Hart, and Morris (1994) described and piloted
a structured model of group supervision over 7 years; 194 counselors-intraining at three different universities were assigned to the structured group
supervision condition and 50 students to a control condition that included
didactic instruction, an unstructured group process, and a case-conceptualization-skill acquisition focus; the structured model was not applied. The
structure in the treatment group included (a) a request for assistance from
one supervisee, (b) a questioning period from supervisees, (c) feedback
statements from supervisees, (d) a pause period, (e) a supervisee response,
and (f) optional discussion. Supervision groups ranged from 8 to 12 students in size. A pretest-posttest analysis demonstrated the structured group
supervision condition was superior to the control condition as measured by
a Counselor Skill and Personal Development Rating Form; in other words,
the structured group was rated to be more effective than the control group in
augmenting novice trainees’ counseling skills and personal growth. In short,
the results of this pilot suggest that adding structure to a group supervision
process is of potential benefit to participants.
Adaptation of SPGS for Novice CITs
We have adapted the structured group supervision models proposed by
Borders (1991) and Wilbur et al. (1994) and applied them in the supervision
of novice CITs. Although the Wilbur et al. model was piloted with groups
of 8 to 12 and Harvey and Struzziero (2008) suggested groups of 4 to 8,
we have found SPGS to be useful for both small-group (3 to 6 CITs) and
large-group supervision (7 to as many as 16 CITs). Furthermore, although
we have predominantly applied this model at the preservice level, two of
the authors (Newman and Salmon) have begun to employ the model in
ongoing professional development work on consultation at the inservice
level. This application seems to fit with data from Zins and Murphy (1996)
suggesting that school psychologist practitioners relish opportunities for peer
support.206 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
The steps. Our adapted structure for SPGS is featured in the Appendix
and is also featured as an appendix in the syllabi for the consultation courses
we teach. Consistent with characteristics of effective peer groups as described
by Counselman and Weber (2004), CITs are expected to develop a working
group contract, work collaboratively through any problems that may arise,
and stay on task during group discussions by following the format provided.
Groups are also expected to determine a process for prioritizing whose turn
it is to request help from the group; time is limited, and all group members
will likely not get a chance to present/receive feedback during each SPGS
session.
The presenting CIT provides the group sufficient background information on his or her consultation casework and explicitly requests assistance
on a specific problem. Audio/videotapes, transcripts, written summaries, or
other data can be shared to help others understand the dilemma. As instructors, we have noticed that suggesting CITs bring data to supervision encourages preparation. Following the CIT’s request for assistance, group members
paraphrase and clarify the information to make sure they understand the
presenting problem. Not coincidentally, the emphasis during the ‘‘Seeking
Clarification’’ stage is on the skills we want CITs to be practicing in their
consultation work (e.g., active listening, distinguishing between clarifying
and relevant questions, avoiding advice giving). Once clarifying questions
are exhausted (i.e., the request for assistance is sufficiently clear), group
members provide feedback regarding their perspectives on the case and
what they would do if they were in the presenter’s shoes. It is important that
at this point in the process the CIT remains silent in order to critically listen
to feedback. Our students have reported that staying silent and listening at
this stage is challenging because the natural tendency is to become defensive
(e.g., ‘‘Yes, but : : : ’’) when others are offering perspectives on the situation.
Hence, after feedback is provided, the group takes a short break to
allow for the presenting CIT to reflect on what was suggested, and then the
CIT is able to offer a response statement to the group. At this point, group
members remain silent, and the presenting CIT can let others know what
was helpful or not helpful (and why) and describe the next steps they will
take in their consultation work. If the groups are part of a larger group (e.g.,
Newman and Salmon’s current class has 16 CITs divided into four groups of
4 CITs each), all groups may come together at the end to discuss pertinent
issues.
It should be noted that in addition to the in-class SPGS process, CITs
are required to complete session logs for each consultation session held with
their consultee(s). For these logs, students are required to listen to their taped
session and to reflect on the consultation process, the consultant-consultee
relationship, and their use of communication skills. These logs serve as a
guide for critical thought on the consultation session as well as a source
of evidence to present during the SPGS case presentation. The reader isStructured Peer Group Supervision 207
referred to Burkhouse (2012) for a reflective log template that can be used
in consultation training.
Direct instruction of the SPGS. The process we have just presented is
deceptively simple. In fact, several of the components may be considered
contrary to natural tendencies of interaction. For example, individuals tend to
offer advice before fully understanding concerns and tend to ask questions
about what they are thinking (i.e., relevant questions) even if it is not directly
related to the information someone has just shared. Therefore, we have found
it useful to engage in an explicit ‘‘I do, we do, you do’’ process of instruction,
modeling, and practice to teach CITs how to access supervision through an
SPGS process. The timeline for teaching the process and its implementation
are highlighted in Table 1.
To teach the SPGS model, CITs first read through the steps of the
process, and then we discuss it as a class, including the rationale for each
stage (as described earlier in this article). Next, the process is modeled in
front of the class. Because Newman and Salmon co-teach, one acts as a group
TABLE 1 Proposed Timeline for Implementing SPGS of Consultation at the Preservice Level
Level of consultation training
Approximate
week of
consultation
training
Instructional
stage Nondoctoral Doctoral
6  CITs begin school–
based consultation
with a teacher
 CITs begin school-based
consultation with a teacher
10 ‘‘I do’’  SPGS is overviewed
 SPGS is modeled
 SPGS is overviewed
 SPGS is modeled
11  SPGS is reviewed  SPGS is reviewed
10 to 20 ‘‘We do’’  SPGS is implemented
in full class setting
(approximately 16
CITs); individual CITs
taking turns to present
on cases
 Instructor acts as
moderator to make
sure SPGS is followed
 SPGS is implemented in a small
group setting; CITs taking turns
presenting on cases (all students
have a turn each week)
 Instructor acts as a model and
moderator to make sure SPGS is
followed
12 or 13  CITs take turns as
moderator to make
sure SPGS is followed
 CITs self-monitor to make sure
SPGS is followed
 Instructor acts as a peer
participant in the group
21 to 30 ‘‘You do’’  SPGS is implemented
in small groups
(approximately 4 CITs)
 Instructor is freed to
take on varying
supervisory roles
 SPGS continues to be
implemented in a single small
group
 Instructor acts as a peer
participant
CIT D consultant in training; SPGS D structured peer group supervision.208 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
participant working with three volunteer CITs and the other acts as a ‘‘process
narrator’’ helping the class, as well as the small group itself, understand
and work through the stages sequentially and effectively. Following SPGS
modeling, the instructors facilitate a class discussion to address lingering
questions or concerns. The process is reviewed the following week prior to
its application by CITs.
SPGS at the nondoctoral level. Newman and Salmon co-teach a 30-week
(three quarters or two semesters) three-course consultation sequence for
second-year school psychology students, where students begin consulting
with teachers in schools around Week 6 and take on two to three cases
during the sequence. The SPGS is practiced as a full class (CITs sign up to
present on their ongoing casework) between Weeks 10 and 20 and in small
groups (approximately four CITs) during Weeks 21 through 30. Although
the instructors in some ways facilitate the full class SPGS process to begin
with (e.g., ‘‘Are there any additional clarifying questions?’’ or ‘‘Have we
inadvertently jumped into the feedback stage?’’), a volunteer CIT takes the
role of making sure the class is not deviating from the SPGS format after a few
weeks. The same CIT also keeps track of time to make sure class participation
is maximized but that those who are presenting that day receive sufficient
feedback.
We estimate that by the third quarter of our sequence (approximately
Week 21), the CITs have begun to develop a sufficient knowledge of consultation content and process to begin to support one another in small groups,
and we have provided sufficient practice in SPGS for the process to run
smoothly. The groups are determined by the CITs based on the level of
school they are working at, as concerns may have increased homogeneity.
As CITs apply the SPGS independently in small groups, the instructors are
freed up to take on different roles during this time (e.g., providing individual
supervision to a CIT in need, acting as a ‘‘fly on the wall’’ in groups, or
participating as a ‘‘peer’’ in groups while sticking to the SPGS format).
SPGS at the doctoral level. Nebbergall recently applied the SPGS framework at the doctoral level in the second semester of a 30-week school
consultation course sequence during which students engage in a schoolbased practicum and take on three consultation cases. The class consisted
of three students in their second year. Historically, practica for this course
were paired with individual supervision for each CIT. However, as noted
earlier, the provision of individual supervision requires both extensive time
and staff resources, which were not available for this semester. SPGS was
piloted as an alternative.
The small class size typical of a doctoral-level program led to select
modifications to the SPGS process. First, the supervision framework was
immediately modeled and practiced in a small group. Second, all students
had the opportunity to receive supervision each week. The role of the
instructor also varied from the larger group application. Given the smallStructured Peer Group Supervision 209
number of students, the instructor was able to sit in as a ‘‘peer’’ in the
group, initially acting as a model and moderator of the process and later as
a peer group member in requesting clarification and providing feedback to
the presenting CIT.
Having participated in individual supervision as part of other classes,
this group of CITs was uniquely poised to draw comparisons between their
experiences with the SPGS model and the more traditional individual supervision model. CITs largely provided positive feedback, citing the advantages
of vicarious learning from peers. CITs felt that they were able to reflect on
and plan for their own cases based on feedback given by classmates during
the SPGS process.
When participating in the SPGS process, CITs did not have a supervisor
reviewing their taped consultation session weekly. CITs reported feeling less
anxiety during their consultation sessions as a result. They felt ‘‘more present’’
in the consultation dyad rather than feeling distracted by fear of judgment or
evaluation from a supervisor. On the other hand, although CITs felt that the
session logs provided adequate opportunity and guidance for reflection on
the consultant–consultee relationship and their use of communication skills,
they acknowledged that an individual supervisor might have more strongly
challenged them in these areas, especially if given access to tapes.
Examples of SPGS in action. Newman and Salmon informally surveyed
the CITs in their consultation class regarding (a) what requests for help
were made in their supervision groups, (b) what specific clarifying questions or other communication interactions supported the supervision group’s
understanding of the problem, and (c) what feedback was most useful in
addressing requests for help.
Examples of requests for help. Requests for help appear to cluster under
categories of concerns that are commonly faced by novice CITs (Conoley,
1981; Newman, 2012b) including problem-solving process variables (e.g.,
difficulty with scheduling meetings; how to make an intervention a shared
responsibility), problem-solving stages (e.g., where to go next in a case),
communication skills (e.g., how well did the CIT use communication skills
during the consultation case session?), CIT’s status as a student (e.g., is
the consultee working with me because they need help or to help me
complete an assignment?), relationships (e.g., how to deal with conflict in
a consultation), and supervision (e.g., negotiating the roles of CIT and field
supervisor in the consultation case). Note, this is not a comprehensive list
of requests for help/CIT concerns but rather a few examples of issues that
might be discussed in SPGS of school consultation; the reader is referred to
Newman (2012b) for a consideration of other common concerns that might
arise for CITs during supervision.
Examples of clarifying questions. Following are a few examples of clarifying questions that CITs incorporated in their SPGS sessions at the second
step of the process. Again, rather than attempting to list all questions asked210 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
during SPGS, this list is intended to illustrate how peer consultants might
help seek clarification during SPGS.
 How will you discuss the intervention with the consultee?
 You said cultural factors might be playing a role in the identified problems.
What cultural factors?
 What does teacher instructional support look like?
 What do you mean by ‘‘emotionally disturbed’’?
 What were the consultee’s nonverbal behaviors?
Examples of feedback. Finally, CITs provided us with examples of feedback that they found helpful in their SPGS work. CITs found it supportive
when peers acknowledged that a case was difficult/validated their concerns
or shared information regarding their own related experiences (e.g., ‘‘I used
this intervention in the past and here’s how it worked.’’). Peers sometimes
provided specific feedback regarding a presenter’s need to collect more
information in a case, including completing a student record review or a
classroom observation focused on instructional practices. Specific feedback
was also provided regarding a number of process variables in presenters’
consultation work such as how to discuss intervention implementation with
a teacher/consultee, where to go next in the process when the CIT felt stuck,
evaluation of communication skills after listening to a segment of a taped
consultation session, and how the peer might address relationship difficulties
if he or she were in the presenter’s shoes.
Potential Pitfalls of an SPGS Approach
The potential benefits of applying SPGS seem clear, but the process is not
perfect. One challenge of SPGS includes navigating group dynamics; not every group functions fluidly from the start, and some group members are more
motivated to participate actively than others. It is not clear whether it is more
advantageous for instructors to assign groups based on perceptions of CIT
skills and effort or to allow CITs to choose groups for themselves based on
consultation case commonalities. Despite prospective challenges with group
dynamics, we believe the structure in some ways encourages individual accountability (i.e., the CIT will have to present at some point in time and wants
to provide useful feedback to his or her peers). Another possible pitfall for
SPGS is that the process may be perceived or experienced as too contrived.
This seems especially to be the case as CITs are first learning the SPGS process. The process does not necessarily allow for the flexibility or adaptability
needed to deal with crisis situations; nor does it leave a great deal of space
for socializing/developing rapport. Furthermore, CITs are unlikely to see a
formal SPGS model in place at their practicum, internship, or future employment sites, so the process may seem aberrant from the realities of practice.Structured Peer Group Supervision 211
The Promise of an SPGS Approach
In spite of some challenges in its application, SPGS appears to hold potential
as a format for supervision of consultation at the preservice level. We have
found that the structure of the process requires participants to be prepared
for and engaged in supervision. CITs reflect on their ongoing consultation
cases each week and bring in specific concerns that are tied to materials
(e.g., audio/video, data, or other) from their work. In addition, SPGS includes embedded opportunities for CITs to practice consultation skills such
as engaging in active listening, asking clarifying questions, paraphrasing,
and providing thoughtful feedback. We see these skills as applicable to their
ongoing and future consultation work and also to their skills in providing
peer support to school psychology colleagues in the future. Further, SPGS
is built on foundations of vicarious learning. First, CITs are able to learn
from each other’s consultation casework—gaining exposure to a variety of
experiences they may not otherwise have accessed. Second, they can gain
information from a number of peer supervisors, each who may have some
divergent perspectives.
Because most school psychology training programs do not include extensive supervision of consultation (Anton-LaHart & Rosenfield, 2004; Hazel,
Laviolette, & Lineman, 2010), SPGS may be seen as an enhancement of
current consultation training practices. Although some preliminary evidence
suggests supervision can be of benefit to CITs (Newman, 2012a), there
does not yet exist evidence regarding SPGS for school consultation training.
However, as seen in our descriptions, the method seems to hold promise in
supporting nondoctoral consultation courses with large numbers of students
as well as small classes of doctoral students.
SPGS also seems relevant to supporting inservice-level consultation skill
development and practice and to support training and practice in other
professional skill domains such as assessment, counseling, and supervision
(e.g., SPGS can be used for metasupervision). In fact, because data suggest
variability regarding the quantity and quality of supervision in the field,
application of an SPGS model may help fill a needed gap. Moreover, when
students are explicitly trained in an SPGS approach during their school
psychology training, perhaps they will be more likely to apply this method,
or aspects of the method, when supporting or receiving support from peers
in the field.
A Proposed Research Agenda
The authors of this article feel SPGS holds promise as part of consultation
training and also as a mode for providing supervision at the preservice
and inservice levels for other domain areas. However, to date, our recommendations remain unsupported by empirical data. Research studies in212 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
the areas of supervision in school psychology in general, and supervision
of consultation in particular, are few and far between. To the best of the
authors’ knowledge, research on an SPGS model for supervision in school
psychology is nonexistent, let alone on SPGS in school consultation training.
Empirical evidence that an SPGS approach is beneficial for CITs could make a
significant impact on how training programs approach consultation training.
Although additional descriptive studies may provide a starting point for
research (e.g., How many school psychology training programs currently
incorporate group and/or peer group supervision in consultation training?
How is it structured? What is the social validity of the process?), given the
dearth of literature and research in this area, we may already know the
answers to many of these questions. Therefore, it may be helpful to complete
a study that includes random assignment of CITs to supervision conditions
(e.g., SPGS alone, combination of SPGS and individual, individual alone) and
includes evaluation on a number of domains (e.g., CIT competency development, acceptability, feasibility, integrity of implementation, and impact on
consultees and clients [the gold standard of supervision research], to name
a few). Further, it would be worthwhile to study how, if at all, involvement
in an SPGS model at the preservice level affects peer supervision processes
during the internship, early career, and beyond.
Summary
A contradiction exists between the proposed need for supervision in school
psychology training and practice and the actions of university educators and
field-based practitioners. In this article, we have proposed a structured peer
group supervision (SPGS) model as one promising approach to bridge this
gap. We have attempted to demonstrate the value of SPGS for nondoctoral
and doctoral consultants in training (CITs), and we have suggested that SPGS
also may be relevant at the inservice level in supporting consultation skill
development in addition to other domains. Although the approach is not
without challenges, our experiences and feedback from students suggest it
is worth the effort. However, we also realize that anecdotal assertions are
not sufficient in and of themselves to support our claims. We hope this
article serves as a call for future research in the areas of supervision and
consultation, research that can inform increasingly effective training practices
in the field.
REFERENCES
Anton-LaHart, J., & Rosenfield, S. (2004). A survey of preservice consultation training
in school psychology programs. Journal of Educational and Psychological
Consultation, 15, 41–62.Structured Peer Group Supervision 213
Arra, C. T. (2010). An examination of cross-cultural curriculum development and student cross-cultural competencies in a school-based consultation course. Journal
of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 20, 169–183.
Bernard, J. M., & Goodyear, R. K. (2009). Fundamentals of clinical supervision
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Borders, L. D. (1991). A systematic approach to peer group supervision. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 69, 248–252.
Burkhouse, K. S. (2012). Educating a reflective school consultant: Multi-faceted techniques. In S. Rosenfield (Ed.), Becoming a school consultant: Lessons learned
(pp. 25–47). New York, NY: Routledge.
Chafouleas, S. M., Clonan, S. M., & Vanauken, T. L. (2002). A national survey of
current supervision and evaluation practices of school psychologists. Psychology
in the Schools, 39, 317–325.
Cochrane, W. S., Salyers, K., & Ding, Y. (2010). An examination of the preparation, supervisor’s theoretical model, and university support for supervisors of
school psychology interns. Trainers’ Forum: Journal of the Trainers of School
Psychologists, 29(1), 6–23.
Conoley, J. C. (1981). Emergent training issues in consultation. In J. C. Conoley (Ed.),
Consultation in schools: Theory, research, and procedures (pp. 223–263). New
York, NY: Academy Press.
Counselman, E. F., & Weber, R. L. (2004). Organizing and maintaining peer supervision groups. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 54, 125–143.
Cramer, K., & Rosenfield, S. (2003). Clinical supervision of consultation. The Clinical
Supervisor, 22, 111–124.
Crespi, T. D., & Dube, J. M. B. (2005). Clinical supervision in school psychology:
Challenges, considerations, and ethical and legal issues for clinical supervisors.
The Clinical Supervisor, 24, 115–135.
Curtis, M. J., Castillo, J. M., & Gelley, C. (2012). School psychology 2010: Demographics, employment, and the context for professional practices. Part 1.
Communiqué, 40(7), 1, 28–30.
Fischetti, B. A., & Crespi, T. D. (1999). Clinical supervision for school psychologists:
National practices, trends and future implications. School Psychology International, 20, 278–288.
Harvey, V. S., & Pearrow, M. (2010). Identifying challenges in supervising school
psychologists. Psychology in the Schools, 47, 567–581.
Harvey, V. S., & Struzziero, J. (2008). Professional development and supervision of
school psychologists: From intern to expert (2nd ed.). Bethesda, MD: Corwin
Press and NASP Publications.
Hazel, C. E., Laviolette, G. T., & Lineman, J. M. (2010). Training professional psychologists in school-based consultation: What the syllabi suggest. Training and
Education in Professional Psychology, 4, 235–243.
Kaufman, J. (2010). Contemporary issues in supervision. In J. Kaufman, T. L. Hughes,
& C. A. Riccio (Eds.), Handbook of education, training, and supervision of
school psychologists in school and community (Vol. 2, pp. 19–35). New York,
NY: Routledge.
Knoff, H. M. (1986). Supervision in school psychology: The forgotten or future path
to effective services? School Psychology Review, 15, 529–545.214 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
Lassiter, P. S., Napolitano, L., Culbreth, J. R., & Ng, K. (2008). Developing multicultural competence using the structured peer group supervision model. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 47, 164–178.
Mastoras, S. M., & Andrews, J. J. W. (2011). The supervisee experience of group
supervision: Implications for research and practice. Training and Education in
Professional Psychology, 5, 102–111.
McIntosh, D. E., & Phelps, L. (2000). Supervision in school psychology: Where will
the future take us? Psychology in the Schools, 37, 33–38.
National Association of School Psychologists. (2010). Professional standards. Bethesda,
MD: Author.
National Association of School Psychologists. (2011). Supervision in school psychology (Position Statement). Bethesda, MD: Author.
Newell, M. (2010a). The implementation of problem-solving consultation: An analysis of problem conceptualization in a multiracial context. Journal of Educational
and Psychological Consultation, 20, 83–105.
Newell, M. (2010b). Exploring the use of computer simulation to evaluate the implementation of problem-solving consultation. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 20, 228–255.
Newell, M. L. (2012). Transforming knowledge to skill: Evaluating the consultation
competence of novice school-based consultants. Consulting Psychology Journal:
Practice and Research, 64(2), 8–28.
Newman, D. S. (2012a). A grounded theory study of supervision of preservice
consultation training. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation,
22, 247–279.
Newman, D. (2012b). Supervision of school-based consultation training: Addressing
the concerns of novice consultants. In S. Rosenfield (Ed.), Becoming a school
consultant: Lessons learned (pp. 49–70). New York, NY: Routledge.
Romans, J. S. C., Boswell, D. L., Carlozzi, A. F., & Ferguson, D. B. (1995). Training and
supervision practices in clinical, counseling, and school psychology programs.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 407–412.
Rosenfield, S. (Ed.). (2012). Becoming a school consultant: Lessons learned. New
York, NY: Routledge.
Rosenfield, S., Levinsohn-Klyap, M., & Cramer, K. (2010). Educating consultants for
practice in the schools. In E. Vasquez, T. D. Crespi, & C. Riccio (Eds.), Handbook
of education, training, and supervision of school psychologists in school and
community (Vol. 1, pp. 259–278). New York, NY: Routledge.
Ward, S. B. (2001). Intern supervision in school psychology: Practice and process
of field-based and university supervisors. School Psychology International, 22,
269–284.
Wilbur, M. P., Roberts-Wilbur, J., Hart, G. M., & Morris, J. R. (1994). Structured
group supervision (SGS): A pilot study. Counselor Education and Supervision,
33, 262–279.
Ysseldyke, J., Burns, M. K., & Rosenfield, S. (2009). Blueprints on the future of
training and practice in school psychology: What do they say about educational
and psychological consultation? Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 19, 177–196.
Zins, J. E., & Murphy, J. J. (1996). Consultation with professional peers: A national
survey of the practices of school psychologists. Journal of Educational and
Psychological Consultation, 17, 175–184.Structured Peer Group Supervision 215
APPENDIX
STRUCTURED PEER GROUP SUPERVISION FORMAT
In class, students will have the opportunity to engage in peer supervision
regarding experiences during their consultation work. Consistent with characteristics of well-functioning peer supervision groups (e.g., see Counselman
& Weber, 2004), you will be expected to (a) develop a working group
contract, (b) stay on task during group discussions, (c) work collaboratively
through problems, and (d) follow a format for group supervision as provided
here. Any violations of the group contract should be discussed and addressed
by the group.
The following steps adapted from the work of Borders (1991) and
Wilbur, Roberts-Wilbur, Hart, and Morris (1994) provide a format for group
supervision:
Step 1: Request for Help. The presenting consultant in training (CIT) states
what assistance is being requested from the supervision group. Summary
information may be presented using audio/videotapes, data from the case,
written summaries, and/or verbal statements. Following the presentation of
information, the CIT should state what he or she is requesting assistance
with (e.g., ‘‘I need the group’s help to : : : ’’).
Step 2: Seeking Clarification. The group members should paraphrase and
clarify regarding the information presented in Step 1 to make sure they
accurately understand the presenting concern(s). Peers should avoid asking relevant questions (e.g., those not stemming directly from information
provided by the presenter). Questions should be asked one at a time in
an orderly manner until there are no more questions (i.e., the request for
assistance is clear).
Step 3: Feedback. Group members respond to the information provided
in Steps 1 and 2 by stating how they might handle their peer’s concern
(e.g., ‘‘If I were working with that teacher, I might : : : ’’). The presenting CIT
should remain silent but take notes regarding the comments or suggestions.
Feedback should be provided one at a time in an orderly manner until there
is no additional feedback.
Pause/Break: A break of a few minutes between Steps 3 and 4 allows for
the presenting CIT’s reflection on the group members’ feedback.
Step 4: Response Statement. The group members remain silent and allow
the presenting CIT to respond to each person’s feedback, one at a time. The
presenting CIT may choose to state whether particular feedback was helpful
or not and why it was helpful or not. The response statement concludes with
the presenting CIT summarizing the next steps for the consultation work.
Step 5: Discussion (optional). Time depending, issues discussed in small
peer supervision groups may be discussed with the full class.216 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
Daniel S. Newman, PhD, is an Assistant Professor in the School Psychology Program at
National Louis University in Illinois, having earned his doctoral degree in school psychology
from the University of Maryland, College Park. His research interests include school consultation, consultation training, and supervision. He is chair of the National Association of School
Psychologists Early Career Workgroup.
Allison J. Nebbergall, PhD, is a school psychologist for the KIPP New Orleans Schools
charter network, having earned her doctorate in school psychology from the University of
Maryland, College Park. She specializes in school and community-based program evaluation.
Diane Salmon, PhD, received her doctorate in educational psychology (with concentrations
in school psychology and human development) from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in
1989. She is a tenured faculty member at National Louis University in school and educational
psychology and interim director for research in the College of Education. Dr. Salmon’s research
focuses on relationships between social cognition, learning, and curriculum design.
Note: The authors report that to the best of their knowledge neither they nor their affiliated
institutions have financial or personal relationships or affiliations that could influence or bias
the opinions, decisions, or work presented in this articleStructured Peer Group Supervision 201
advocated for ‘‘the professional supervision of school psychologists by school
psychologists at all levels of practice (e.g., student, intern, early career, and
expert) as a means of ensuring effective practices to support the educational
attainment of all children’’ (p. 1). The need for supervision in school psychology practice is further emphasized in the NASP Professional Standards
(2010), a set of four documents intended to inform graduate education,
credentialing, professional practices, and ethical behavior of school psychologists. For instance, in NASP’s Model for Comprehensive and Integrated
School Psychological Services document, Supervision and Mentoring is designated as a critical feature for organizations employing school psychologists;
guidance regarding supervisor credentials and supervision processes are also
provided.
However, data regarding supervision practices in school psychology (at
preservice, internship, and inservice levels) appear to contradict assertions
regarding supervision’s importance. For example, descriptive studies have
demonstrated (a) limited availability and perceived insufficiency of clinical supervision for practicing school psychologists (Chafouleas, Clonan, &
Vanauken, 2002; Curtis, Castillo, & Gelley, 2012; Fischetti & Crespi, 1999);
(b) a lack of supervision techniques other than case consultation (i.e., talking
about cases) predominately applied by supervisors (Cochrane, Salyers, &
Ding, 2010; Romans, Boswell, Carlozzi, & Ferguson, 1995; Ward, 2001);
and (c) supervisors (both field and university) not having completed supervision coursework, ongoing professional development on supervision,
or formal metasupervision (i.e., supervision of supervision; Cochrane et al.,
2010; Ward, 2001). A number of factors may account for the gap between
the purported value of supervision and what is actually practiced, including
complexity in defining and researching supervision (Knoff, 1986; McIntosh &
Phelps, 2000). Moreover, much of what we claim to know about supervision
in school psychology is largely informed from research in other mental health
fields such as Clinical Psychology, Psychotherapy, and Social Work (e.g., see
Bernard & Goodyear, 2009).
Consistent with the field of school psychology as a whole, the provision
of supervision in school consultation is argued to be critical (Cramer &
Rosenfield, 2003; Harvey & Struzziero, 2008; Newman, 2012b; Rosenfield,
Levinsohn-Klyap, & Cramer, 2010), yet research and practice in this area
remain deficient (e.g., see Anton-LaHart & Rosenfield, 2004). Nonetheless,
a popular opinion that has permeated the consultation literature is that
consultation skills are not learned on the fly; intensive, strategic, and developmentally focused training including supervision is argued to be essential
in supporting the development of competent consultants (Rosenfield, 2012;
Rosenfield et al., 2010; Ysseldyke, Burns, & Rosenfield, 2009). Some recent
research studies have provided support for the importance of consultation training (e.g., Arra, 2010; Newell, 2010a, 2010b, 2012) and supervision
(Newman, 2012a).202 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
In this article we present a structured peer group supervision (SPGS)
model for novice consultants in training (CITs) and describe its application
at nondoctoral and doctoral levels of consultation training. In so doing, our
purposes are to (a) provide a structure that can be immediately applied by
consultation trainers and CITs to augment the effectiveness of consultation
training and (b) open a new potential avenue to extend upon consultation
training and supervision research. To begin, we briefly define and describe
supervision in school psychology including prevalent models, techniques,
and formats. Specific attention is given to SPGS, including the delineation
of an adapted model. Next, using specific examples from our incorporation
of the model in consultation training, we describe how the model can be
instructed and applied at nondoctoral and doctoral levels and in small and
large groups. The article concludes with a discussion of the promise of an
SPGS model in consultation training and considerations for future research
regarding its effectiveness.
SUPERVISION IN SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY
Broadly defined, supervision in school psychology is ‘‘an interpersonal interaction between two or more individuals for the purpose of sharing knowledge, assessing professional competencies, and providing objective feedback
with the terminal goals of developing new competencies, facilitating effective
delivery of psychological services, and maintaining professional competencies’’ (McIntosh & Phelps, 2000, pp. 33–34). Unlike related fields, school
psychology is embedded within a complex educational context, which may
require unique contextual considerations in supervision (Crespi & Dube,
2005; Harvey & Pearrow, 2010; Harvey & Struzziero, 2008). Because the
McIntosh and Phelps (2000) definition of supervision is broad, it may be
considered inclusive of a variety of supervision models, techniques, and
formats that may be applied by supervisors in support of trainees and practitioners.
Models
Harvey and Struzziero (2008) argued that ‘‘the structure of clinical supervision
profoundly influences its potential to be effective’’ (p. 182). The structure of
supervision is in large part informed by a supervisor’s theoretical orientation
and choice of supervision model. In the general psychology supervision
literature, there exist countless models of supervision such as (a) those
rooted in psychotherapy (e.g., psychodynamic, person-centered, cognitivebehavioral), (b) developmental models (both stage-based and processdriven), and (c) social role models (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009). AlthoughStructured Peer Group Supervision 203
a number of models have been discussed in school psychology supervision
literature there is no evidence to suggest one model is superior to others
(Kaufman, 2010).
Techniques
Supervision is also constructed via techniques (also called methods or interventions) applied by supervisors. The choice of techniques is informed
by the supervisor’s orientation and model as well as supervision goals and
supervisee developmental level (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009). Examples of
techniques include case consultation, cofacilitation of activities, live observation, audio/videotaping, role playing, supervisor modeling/supervisee rehearsal, and written information (e.g., process notes, progress notes, and
transcription). Even though a number of techniques may be relevant to apply,
supervisors do not always select a wide range of strategies or implement the
ones they view as most effective (Romans et al., 1995). For a further description of supervisory techniques, including advantages and disadvantages, the
reader is referred to Harvey and Struzziero (2008).
Formats
Individual supervision. Individual supervision is the most commonly
applied format, consisting of one supervisor working with one supervisee.
This format is potentially the most time consuming to apply; however, it
allows for differentiation of supervision to meet the unique needs of the
supervisee and allows for close evaluation of progress toward supervision
goals. An alternate way to provide individual supervision that may be more
time efficient is in a small group during which the supervisor works with
each supervisee individually in a round-robin fashion (Harvey & Struzziero,
2008).
Group supervision. Group supervision is the ongoing meeting of a group
of supervisees with a supervisor or supervisors during which ‘‘supervisees are
aided in achieving [their] goals by their supervisor(s) and by their feedback
from and interactions with each other’’ (Bernard & Goodyear, 2009, p. 244).
Supervision can be provided to the group as a whole regarding common
issues or individually within the group setting (Harvey & Struzziero, 2008).
Even though there exists a wide range of potential variability in the structure
of group supervision (Mastoras & Andrews, 2011), Harvey and Struzziero
(2008) offered some guiding principles. Group size should be limited to
between four and eight participants and supervisee developmental levels
and topics of interest should be relatively homogeneous. In addition, the
authors suggest that having a group structure for presenting and discussing
cases and supervisor provision of feedback can be helpful.204 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
Peer group supervision. Peer group supervision is a type of group supervision that is nonhierarchical; such groups are leaderless (Counselman &
Weber, 2004), participants have comparable levels of experience, and supervision does not include a formal evaluation process (Bernard & Goodyear,
2009). Zins and Murphy (1996) investigated what they called ‘‘peer support
groups’’ in school psychology. Analogous to peer supervision groups, Zins
and Murphy defined peer support groups as ‘‘a small group of professionals
with a common area of interest who meet periodically to learn together, to
share their expertise, and to support one another in their ongoing professional development’’ (p. 176). The authors conceptualized such groups as a
form of embedded professional development for school psychologists and
found that 64% of respondents (n D 399) reported prior or current participation in such a group. Perceived benefits of peer support groups included
improved skills in providing specific psychological services, expanded range
of services offered, increased enthusiasm for the job, increased use of accountability measures, increased involvement in professional organizations,
and increased knowledge base in school psychology. Of their participants,
93% expressed a moderate or higher level of interest in becoming part of a
peer group.
Clearly, peer support is perceived to be of benefit at the inservice level.
This may be due in part to the fact that other types of supervisory support are
not always available to school psychologists once they enter the field. For
example, Zins and Murphy (1996) found that of their respondents, only 14%
received individual clinical supervision. However, it seems that school psychology practitioners do not always access peer support. In the most recent
NASP member survey, Curtis et al. (2012) found that only 56.2% of the fulltime school psychologist respondents received administrative supervision
(i.e., focused on administrative issues vs. clinical skills), and only 28.5% reported systematic professional support, mentoring, and/or peer supervision.
Perhaps a gap exists regarding how to best access peer support.
Structured peer group supervision (SPGS). Some authors have suggested
that group and peer group supervision may be most effective when implemented with a formal structure. For example, Borders (1991) described a
systematic approach to group supervision that she applied over 6 years with
90 counselors-in-training. Groups include three to six supervisees with a
trained supervisor acting in the role of moderator and process observer.
Although Borders described the model as ‘‘peer group supervision,’’ it does
not seem to be leaderless and includes a supervisor who formatively assesses
developmental levels of supervisees. Even though the Borders model is
not necessarily a pure peer group model according to formal definitions,
peers do take an active role in supporting one another, and preparation for
supervision is seen to be critical in the supervision process.
Steps described by Borders (1991) include (a) supervisees identifying
questions/concerns about their videotaped counseling work and requestingStructured Peer Group Supervision 205
feedback; (b) peer supervisors choosing or being assigned roles, perspectives, or tasks for when they review the presenter’s tape (e.g., observing
communication skills or nonverbal behaviors, taking the perspective of the
client, or other variations); (c) presentation of a video segment; (d) provision
of feedback from peer supervisors through the lens of assigned roles or
perspectives; (e) discussion facilitated by the supervisor; (f) summary by the
supervisor; and (g) the supervisee indicating if his or her needs were met by
the supervision. The Borders model has also been adapted to incorporate
multicultural considerations, adding a group member role for observing/
providing feedback on cultural issues at the second step and encouraging
an increased multicultural focus from the supervisor throughout the process
(Lassiter, Napolitano, Culbreth, & Ng, 2008).
Wilbur, Roberts-Wilbur, Hart, and Morris (1994) described and piloted
a structured model of group supervision over 7 years; 194 counselors-intraining at three different universities were assigned to the structured group
supervision condition and 50 students to a control condition that included
didactic instruction, an unstructured group process, and a case-conceptualization-skill acquisition focus; the structured model was not applied. The
structure in the treatment group included (a) a request for assistance from
one supervisee, (b) a questioning period from supervisees, (c) feedback
statements from supervisees, (d) a pause period, (e) a supervisee response,
and (f) optional discussion. Supervision groups ranged from 8 to 12 students in size. A pretest-posttest analysis demonstrated the structured group
supervision condition was superior to the control condition as measured by
a Counselor Skill and Personal Development Rating Form; in other words,
the structured group was rated to be more effective than the control group in
augmenting novice trainees’ counseling skills and personal growth. In short,
the results of this pilot suggest that adding structure to a group supervision
process is of potential benefit to participants.
Adaptation of SPGS for Novice CITs
We have adapted the structured group supervision models proposed by
Borders (1991) and Wilbur et al. (1994) and applied them in the supervision
of novice CITs. Although the Wilbur et al. model was piloted with groups
of 8 to 12 and Harvey and Struzziero (2008) suggested groups of 4 to 8,
we have found SPGS to be useful for both small-group (3 to 6 CITs) and
large-group supervision (7 to as many as 16 CITs). Furthermore, although
we have predominantly applied this model at the preservice level, two of
the authors (Newman and Salmon) have begun to employ the model in
ongoing professional development work on consultation at the inservice
level. This application seems to fit with data from Zins and Murphy (1996)
suggesting that school psychologist practitioners relish opportunities for peer
support.206 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
The steps. Our adapted structure for SPGS is featured in the Appendix
and is also featured as an appendix in the syllabi for the consultation courses
we teach. Consistent with characteristics of effective peer groups as described
by Counselman and Weber (2004), CITs are expected to develop a working
group contract, work collaboratively through any problems that may arise,
and stay on task during group discussions by following the format provided.
Groups are also expected to determine a process for prioritizing whose turn
it is to request help from the group; time is limited, and all group members
will likely not get a chance to present/receive feedback during each SPGS
session.
The presenting CIT provides the group sufficient background information on his or her consultation casework and explicitly requests assistance
on a specific problem. Audio/videotapes, transcripts, written summaries, or
other data can be shared to help others understand the dilemma. As instructors, we have noticed that suggesting CITs bring data to supervision encourages preparation. Following the CIT’s request for assistance, group members
paraphrase and clarify the information to make sure they understand the
presenting problem. Not coincidentally, the emphasis during the ‘‘Seeking
Clarification’’ stage is on the skills we want CITs to be practicing in their
consultation work (e.g., active listening, distinguishing between clarifying
and relevant questions, avoiding advice giving). Once clarifying questions
are exhausted (i.e., the request for assistance is sufficiently clear), group
members provide feedback regarding their perspectives on the case and
what they would do if they were in the presenter’s shoes. It is important that
at this point in the process the CIT remains silent in order to critically listen
to feedback. Our students have reported that staying silent and listening at
this stage is challenging because the natural tendency is to become defensive
(e.g., ‘‘Yes, but : : : ’’) when others are offering perspectives on the situation.
Hence, after feedback is provided, the group takes a short break to
allow for the presenting CIT to reflect on what was suggested, and then the
CIT is able to offer a response statement to the group. At this point, group
members remain silent, and the presenting CIT can let others know what
was helpful or not helpful (and why) and describe the next steps they will
take in their consultation work. If the groups are part of a larger group (e.g.,
Newman and Salmon’s current class has 16 CITs divided into four groups of
4 CITs each), all groups may come together at the end to discuss pertinent
issues.
It should be noted that in addition to the in-class SPGS process, CITs
are required to complete session logs for each consultation session held with
their consultee(s). For these logs, students are required to listen to their taped
session and to reflect on the consultation process, the consultant-consultee
relationship, and their use of communication skills. These logs serve as a
guide for critical thought on the consultation session as well as a source
of evidence to present during the SPGS case presentation. The reader isStructured Peer Group Supervision 207
referred to Burkhouse (2012) for a reflective log template that can be used
in consultation training.
Direct instruction of the SPGS. The process we have just presented is
deceptively simple. In fact, several of the components may be considered
contrary to natural tendencies of interaction. For example, individuals tend to
offer advice before fully understanding concerns and tend to ask questions
about what they are thinking (i.e., relevant questions) even if it is not directly
related to the information someone has just shared. Therefore, we have found
it useful to engage in an explicit ‘‘I do, we do, you do’’ process of instruction,
modeling, and practice to teach CITs how to access supervision through an
SPGS process. The timeline for teaching the process and its implementation
are highlighted in Table 1.
To teach the SPGS model, CITs first read through the steps of the
process, and then we discuss it as a class, including the rationale for each
stage (as described earlier in this article). Next, the process is modeled in
front of the class. Because Newman and Salmon co-teach, one acts as a group
TABLE 1 Proposed Timeline for Implementing SPGS of Consultation at the Preservice Level
Level of consultation training
Approximate
week of
consultation
training
Instructional
stage Nondoctoral Doctoral
6  CITs begin school–
based consultation
with a teacher
 CITs begin school-based
consultation with a teacher
10 ‘‘I do’’  SPGS is overviewed
 SPGS is modeled
 SPGS is overviewed
 SPGS is modeled
11  SPGS is reviewed  SPGS is reviewed
10 to 20 ‘‘We do’’  SPGS is implemented
in full class setting
(approximately 16
CITs); individual CITs
taking turns to present
on cases
 Instructor acts as
moderator to make
sure SPGS is followed
 SPGS is implemented in a small
group setting; CITs taking turns
presenting on cases (all students
have a turn each week)
 Instructor acts as a model and
moderator to make sure SPGS is
followed
12 or 13  CITs take turns as
moderator to make
sure SPGS is followed
 CITs self-monitor to make sure
SPGS is followed
 Instructor acts as a peer
participant in the group
21 to 30 ‘‘You do’’  SPGS is implemented
in small groups
(approximately 4 CITs)
 Instructor is freed to
take on varying
supervisory roles
 SPGS continues to be
implemented in a single small
group
 Instructor acts as a peer
participant
CIT D consultant in training; SPGS D structured peer group supervision.208 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
participant working with three volunteer CITs and the other acts as a ‘‘process
narrator’’ helping the class, as well as the small group itself, understand
and work through the stages sequentially and effectively. Following SPGS
modeling, the instructors facilitate a class discussion to address lingering
questions or concerns. The process is reviewed the following week prior to
its application by CITs.
SPGS at the nondoctoral level. Newman and Salmon co-teach a 30-week
(three quarters or two semesters) three-course consultation sequence for
second-year school psychology students, where students begin consulting
with teachers in schools around Week 6 and take on two to three cases
during the sequence. The SPGS is practiced as a full class (CITs sign up to
present on their ongoing casework) between Weeks 10 and 20 and in small
groups (approximately four CITs) during Weeks 21 through 30. Although
the instructors in some ways facilitate the full class SPGS process to begin
with (e.g., ‘‘Are there any additional clarifying questions?’’ or ‘‘Have we
inadvertently jumped into the feedback stage?’’), a volunteer CIT takes the
role of making sure the class is not deviating from the SPGS format after a few
weeks. The same CIT also keeps track of time to make sure class participation
is maximized but that those who are presenting that day receive sufficient
feedback.
We estimate that by the third quarter of our sequence (approximately
Week 21), the CITs have begun to develop a sufficient knowledge of consultation content and process to begin to support one another in small groups,
and we have provided sufficient practice in SPGS for the process to run
smoothly. The groups are determined by the CITs based on the level of
school they are working at, as concerns may have increased homogeneity.
As CITs apply the SPGS independently in small groups, the instructors are
freed up to take on different roles during this time (e.g., providing individual
supervision to a CIT in need, acting as a ‘‘fly on the wall’’ in groups, or
participating as a ‘‘peer’’ in groups while sticking to the SPGS format).
SPGS at the doctoral level. Nebbergall recently applied the SPGS framework at the doctoral level in the second semester of a 30-week school
consultation course sequence during which students engage in a schoolbased practicum and take on three consultation cases. The class consisted
of three students in their second year. Historically, practica for this course
were paired with individual supervision for each CIT. However, as noted
earlier, the provision of individual supervision requires both extensive time
and staff resources, which were not available for this semester. SPGS was
piloted as an alternative.
The small class size typical of a doctoral-level program led to select
modifications to the SPGS process. First, the supervision framework was
immediately modeled and practiced in a small group. Second, all students
had the opportunity to receive supervision each week. The role of the
instructor also varied from the larger group application. Given the smallStructured Peer Group Supervision 209
number of students, the instructor was able to sit in as a ‘‘peer’’ in the
group, initially acting as a model and moderator of the process and later as
a peer group member in requesting clarification and providing feedback to
the presenting CIT.
Having participated in individual supervision as part of other classes,
this group of CITs was uniquely poised to draw comparisons between their
experiences with the SPGS model and the more traditional individual supervision model. CITs largely provided positive feedback, citing the advantages
of vicarious learning from peers. CITs felt that they were able to reflect on
and plan for their own cases based on feedback given by classmates during
the SPGS process.
When participating in the SPGS process, CITs did not have a supervisor
reviewing their taped consultation session weekly. CITs reported feeling less
anxiety during their consultation sessions as a result. They felt ‘‘more present’’
in the consultation dyad rather than feeling distracted by fear of judgment or
evaluation from a supervisor. On the other hand, although CITs felt that the
session logs provided adequate opportunity and guidance for reflection on
the consultant–consultee relationship and their use of communication skills,
they acknowledged that an individual supervisor might have more strongly
challenged them in these areas, especially if given access to tapes.
Examples of SPGS in action. Newman and Salmon informally surveyed
the CITs in their consultation class regarding (a) what requests for help
were made in their supervision groups, (b) what specific clarifying questions or other communication interactions supported the supervision group’s
understanding of the problem, and (c) what feedback was most useful in
addressing requests for help.
Examples of requests for help. Requests for help appear to cluster under
categories of concerns that are commonly faced by novice CITs (Conoley,
1981; Newman, 2012b) including problem-solving process variables (e.g.,
difficulty with scheduling meetings; how to make an intervention a shared
responsibility), problem-solving stages (e.g., where to go next in a case),
communication skills (e.g., how well did the CIT use communication skills
during the consultation case session?), CIT’s status as a student (e.g., is
the consultee working with me because they need help or to help me
complete an assignment?), relationships (e.g., how to deal with conflict in
a consultation), and supervision (e.g., negotiating the roles of CIT and field
supervisor in the consultation case). Note, this is not a comprehensive list
of requests for help/CIT concerns but rather a few examples of issues that
might be discussed in SPGS of school consultation; the reader is referred to
Newman (2012b) for a consideration of other common concerns that might
arise for CITs during supervision.
Examples of clarifying questions. Following are a few examples of clarifying questions that CITs incorporated in their SPGS sessions at the second
step of the process. Again, rather than attempting to list all questions asked210 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
during SPGS, this list is intended to illustrate how peer consultants might
help seek clarification during SPGS.
 How will you discuss the intervention with the consultee?
 You said cultural factors might be playing a role in the identified problems.
What cultural factors?
 What does teacher instructional support look like?
 What do you mean by ‘‘emotionally disturbed’’?
 What were the consultee’s nonverbal behaviors?
Examples of feedback. Finally, CITs provided us with examples of feedback that they found helpful in their SPGS work. CITs found it supportive
when peers acknowledged that a case was difficult/validated their concerns
or shared information regarding their own related experiences (e.g., ‘‘I used
this intervention in the past and here’s how it worked.’’). Peers sometimes
provided specific feedback regarding a presenter’s need to collect more
information in a case, including completing a student record review or a
classroom observation focused on instructional practices. Specific feedback
was also provided regarding a number of process variables in presenters’
consultation work such as how to discuss intervention implementation with
a teacher/consultee, where to go next in the process when the CIT felt stuck,
evaluation of communication skills after listening to a segment of a taped
consultation session, and how the peer might address relationship difficulties
if he or she were in the presenter’s shoes.
Potential Pitfalls of an SPGS Approach
The potential benefits of applying SPGS seem clear, but the process is not
perfect. One challenge of SPGS includes navigating group dynamics; not every group functions fluidly from the start, and some group members are more
motivated to participate actively than others. It is not clear whether it is more
advantageous for instructors to assign groups based on perceptions of CIT
skills and effort or to allow CITs to choose groups for themselves based on
consultation case commonalities. Despite prospective challenges with group
dynamics, we believe the structure in some ways encourages individual accountability (i.e., the CIT will have to present at some point in time and wants
to provide useful feedback to his or her peers). Another possible pitfall for
SPGS is that the process may be perceived or experienced as too contrived.
This seems especially to be the case as CITs are first learning the SPGS process. The process does not necessarily allow for the flexibility or adaptability
needed to deal with crisis situations; nor does it leave a great deal of space
for socializing/developing rapport. Furthermore, CITs are unlikely to see a
formal SPGS model in place at their practicum, internship, or future employment sites, so the process may seem aberrant from the realities of practice.Structured Peer Group Supervision 211
The Promise of an SPGS Approach
In spite of some challenges in its application, SPGS appears to hold potential
as a format for supervision of consultation at the preservice level. We have
found that the structure of the process requires participants to be prepared
for and engaged in supervision. CITs reflect on their ongoing consultation
cases each week and bring in specific concerns that are tied to materials
(e.g., audio/video, data, or other) from their work. In addition, SPGS includes embedded opportunities for CITs to practice consultation skills such
as engaging in active listening, asking clarifying questions, paraphrasing,
and providing thoughtful feedback. We see these skills as applicable to their
ongoing and future consultation work and also to their skills in providing
peer support to school psychology colleagues in the future. Further, SPGS
is built on foundations of vicarious learning. First, CITs are able to learn
from each other’s consultation casework—gaining exposure to a variety of
experiences they may not otherwise have accessed. Second, they can gain
information from a number of peer supervisors, each who may have some
divergent perspectives.
Because most school psychology training programs do not include extensive supervision of consultation (Anton-LaHart & Rosenfield, 2004; Hazel,
Laviolette, & Lineman, 2010), SPGS may be seen as an enhancement of
current consultation training practices. Although some preliminary evidence
suggests supervision can be of benefit to CITs (Newman, 2012a), there
does not yet exist evidence regarding SPGS for school consultation training.
However, as seen in our descriptions, the method seems to hold promise in
supporting nondoctoral consultation courses with large numbers of students
as well as small classes of doctoral students.
SPGS also seems relevant to supporting inservice-level consultation skill
development and practice and to support training and practice in other
professional skill domains such as assessment, counseling, and supervision
(e.g., SPGS can be used for metasupervision). In fact, because data suggest
variability regarding the quantity and quality of supervision in the field,
application of an SPGS model may help fill a needed gap. Moreover, when
students are explicitly trained in an SPGS approach during their school
psychology training, perhaps they will be more likely to apply this method,
or aspects of the method, when supporting or receiving support from peers
in the field.
A Proposed Research Agenda
The authors of this article feel SPGS holds promise as part of consultation
training and also as a mode for providing supervision at the preservice
and inservice levels for other domain areas. However, to date, our recommendations remain unsupported by empirical data. Research studies in212 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
the areas of supervision in school psychology in general, and supervision
of consultation in particular, are few and far between. To the best of the
authors’ knowledge, research on an SPGS model for supervision in school
psychology is nonexistent, let alone on SPGS in school consultation training.
Empirical evidence that an SPGS approach is beneficial for CITs could make a
significant impact on how training programs approach consultation training.
Although additional descriptive studies may provide a starting point for
research (e.g., How many school psychology training programs currently
incorporate group and/or peer group supervision in consultation training?
How is it structured? What is the social validity of the process?), given the
dearth of literature and research in this area, we may already know the
answers to many of these questions. Therefore, it may be helpful to complete
a study that includes random assignment of CITs to supervision conditions
(e.g., SPGS alone, combination of SPGS and individual, individual alone) and
includes evaluation on a number of domains (e.g., CIT competency development, acceptability, feasibility, integrity of implementation, and impact on
consultees and clients [the gold standard of supervision research], to name
a few). Further, it would be worthwhile to study how, if at all, involvement
in an SPGS model at the preservice level affects peer supervision processes
during the internship, early career, and beyond.
Summary
A contradiction exists between the proposed need for supervision in school
psychology training and practice and the actions of university educators and
field-based practitioners. In this article, we have proposed a structured peer
group supervision (SPGS) model as one promising approach to bridge this
gap. We have attempted to demonstrate the value of SPGS for nondoctoral
and doctoral consultants in training (CITs), and we have suggested that SPGS
also may be relevant at the inservice level in supporting consultation skill
development in addition to other domains. Although the approach is not
without challenges, our experiences and feedback from students suggest it
is worth the effort. However, we also realize that anecdotal assertions are
not sufficient in and of themselves to support our claims. We hope this
article serves as a call for future research in the areas of supervision and
consultation, research that can inform increasingly effective training practices
in the field.
REFERENCES
Anton-LaHart, J., & Rosenfield, S. (2004). A survey of preservice consultation training
in school psychology programs. Journal of Educational and Psychological
Consultation, 15, 41–62.Structured Peer Group Supervision 213
Arra, C. T. (2010). An examination of cross-cultural curriculum development and student cross-cultural competencies in a school-based consultation course. Journal
of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 20, 169–183.
Bernard, J. M., & Goodyear, R. K. (2009). Fundamentals of clinical supervision
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Borders, L. D. (1991). A systematic approach to peer group supervision. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 69, 248–252.
Burkhouse, K. S. (2012). Educating a reflective school consultant: Multi-faceted techniques. In S. Rosenfield (Ed.), Becoming a school consultant: Lessons learned
(pp. 25–47). New York, NY: Routledge.
Chafouleas, S. M., Clonan, S. M., & Vanauken, T. L. (2002). A national survey of
current supervision and evaluation practices of school psychologists. Psychology
in the Schools, 39, 317–325.
Cochrane, W. S., Salyers, K., & Ding, Y. (2010). An examination of the preparation, supervisor’s theoretical model, and university support for supervisors of
school psychology interns. Trainers’ Forum: Journal of the Trainers of School
Psychologists, 29(1), 6–23.
Conoley, J. C. (1981). Emergent training issues in consultation. In J. C. Conoley (Ed.),
Consultation in schools: Theory, research, and procedures (pp. 223–263). New
York, NY: Academy Press.
Counselman, E. F., & Weber, R. L. (2004). Organizing and maintaining peer supervision groups. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 54, 125–143.
Cramer, K., & Rosenfield, S. (2003). Clinical supervision of consultation. The Clinical
Supervisor, 22, 111–124.
Crespi, T. D., & Dube, J. M. B. (2005). Clinical supervision in school psychology:
Challenges, considerations, and ethical and legal issues for clinical supervisors.
The Clinical Supervisor, 24, 115–135.
Curtis, M. J., Castillo, J. M., & Gelley, C. (2012). School psychology 2010: Demographics, employment, and the context for professional practices. Part 1.
Communiqué, 40(7), 1, 28–30.
Fischetti, B. A., & Crespi, T. D. (1999). Clinical supervision for school psychologists:
National practices, trends and future implications. School Psychology International, 20, 278–288.
Harvey, V. S., & Pearrow, M. (2010). Identifying challenges in supervising school
psychologists. Psychology in the Schools, 47, 567–581.
Harvey, V. S., & Struzziero, J. (2008). Professional development and supervision of
school psychologists: From intern to expert (2nd ed.). Bethesda, MD: Corwin
Press and NASP Publications.
Hazel, C. E., Laviolette, G. T., & Lineman, J. M. (2010). Training professional psychologists in school-based consultation: What the syllabi suggest. Training and
Education in Professional Psychology, 4, 235–243.
Kaufman, J. (2010). Contemporary issues in supervision. In J. Kaufman, T. L. Hughes,
& C. A. Riccio (Eds.), Handbook of education, training, and supervision of
school psychologists in school and community (Vol. 2, pp. 19–35). New York,
NY: Routledge.
Knoff, H. M. (1986). Supervision in school psychology: The forgotten or future path
to effective services? School Psychology Review, 15, 529–545.214 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
Lassiter, P. S., Napolitano, L., Culbreth, J. R., & Ng, K. (2008). Developing multicultural competence using the structured peer group supervision model. Counselor
Education and Supervision, 47, 164–178.
Mastoras, S. M., & Andrews, J. J. W. (2011). The supervisee experience of group
supervision: Implications for research and practice. Training and Education in
Professional Psychology, 5, 102–111.
McIntosh, D. E., & Phelps, L. (2000). Supervision in school psychology: Where will
the future take us? Psychology in the Schools, 37, 33–38.
National Association of School Psychologists. (2010). Professional standards. Bethesda,
MD: Author.
National Association of School Psychologists. (2011). Supervision in school psychology (Position Statement). Bethesda, MD: Author.
Newell, M. (2010a). The implementation of problem-solving consultation: An analysis of problem conceptualization in a multiracial context. Journal of Educational
and Psychological Consultation, 20, 83–105.
Newell, M. (2010b). Exploring the use of computer simulation to evaluate the implementation of problem-solving consultation. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 20, 228–255.
Newell, M. L. (2012). Transforming knowledge to skill: Evaluating the consultation
competence of novice school-based consultants. Consulting Psychology Journal:
Practice and Research, 64(2), 8–28.
Newman, D. S. (2012a). A grounded theory study of supervision of preservice
consultation training. Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation,
22, 247–279.
Newman, D. (2012b). Supervision of school-based consultation training: Addressing
the concerns of novice consultants. In S. Rosenfield (Ed.), Becoming a school
consultant: Lessons learned (pp. 49–70). New York, NY: Routledge.
Romans, J. S. C., Boswell, D. L., Carlozzi, A. F., & Ferguson, D. B. (1995). Training and
supervision practices in clinical, counseling, and school psychology programs.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 407–412.
Rosenfield, S. (Ed.). (2012). Becoming a school consultant: Lessons learned. New
York, NY: Routledge.
Rosenfield, S., Levinsohn-Klyap, M., & Cramer, K. (2010). Educating consultants for
practice in the schools. In E. Vasquez, T. D. Crespi, & C. Riccio (Eds.), Handbook
of education, training, and supervision of school psychologists in school and
community (Vol. 1, pp. 259–278). New York, NY: Routledge.
Ward, S. B. (2001). Intern supervision in school psychology: Practice and process
of field-based and university supervisors. School Psychology International, 22,
269–284.
Wilbur, M. P., Roberts-Wilbur, J., Hart, G. M., & Morris, J. R. (1994). Structured
group supervision (SGS): A pilot study. Counselor Education and Supervision,
33, 262–279.
Ysseldyke, J., Burns, M. K., & Rosenfield, S. (2009). Blueprints on the future of
training and practice in school psychology: What do they say about educational
and psychological consultation? Journal of Educational and Psychological Consultation, 19, 177–196.
Zins, J. E., & Murphy, J. J. (1996). Consultation with professional peers: A national
survey of the practices of school psychologists. Journal of Educational and
Psychological Consultation, 17, 175–184.Structured Peer Group Supervision 215
APPENDIX
STRUCTURED PEER GROUP SUPERVISION FORMAT
In class, students will have the opportunity to engage in peer supervision
regarding experiences during their consultation work. Consistent with characteristics of well-functioning peer supervision groups (e.g., see Counselman
& Weber, 2004), you will be expected to (a) develop a working group
contract, (b) stay on task during group discussions, (c) work collaboratively
through problems, and (d) follow a format for group supervision as provided
here. Any violations of the group contract should be discussed and addressed
by the group.
The following steps adapted from the work of Borders (1991) and
Wilbur, Roberts-Wilbur, Hart, and Morris (1994) provide a format for group
supervision:
Step 1: Request for Help. The presenting consultant in training (CIT) states
what assistance is being requested from the supervision group. Summary
information may be presented using audio/videotapes, data from the case,
written summaries, and/or verbal statements. Following the presentation of
information, the CIT should state what he or she is requesting assistance
with (e.g., ‘‘I need the group’s help to : : : ’’).
Step 2: Seeking Clarification. The group members should paraphrase and
clarify regarding the information presented in Step 1 to make sure they
accurately understand the presenting concern(s). Peers should avoid asking relevant questions (e.g., those not stemming directly from information
provided by the presenter). Questions should be asked one at a time in
an orderly manner until there are no more questions (i.e., the request for
assistance is clear).
Step 3: Feedback. Group members respond to the information provided
in Steps 1 and 2 by stating how they might handle their peer’s concern
(e.g., ‘‘If I were working with that teacher, I might : : : ’’). The presenting CIT
should remain silent but take notes regarding the comments or suggestions.
Feedback should be provided one at a time in an orderly manner until there
is no additional feedback.
Pause/Break: A break of a few minutes between Steps 3 and 4 allows for
the presenting CIT’s reflection on the group members’ feedback.
Step 4: Response Statement. The group members remain silent and allow
the presenting CIT to respond to each person’s feedback, one at a time. The
presenting CIT may choose to state whether particular feedback was helpful
or not and why it was helpful or not. The response statement concludes with
the presenting CIT summarizing the next steps for the consultation work.
Step 5: Discussion (optional). Time depending, issues discussed in small
peer supervision groups may be discussed with the full class.216 D. S. Newman, A. J. Nebbergall, and D. Salmon
Daniel S. Newman, PhD, is an Assistant Professor in the School Psychology Program at
National Louis University in Illinois, having earned his doctoral degree in school psychology
from the University of Maryland, College Park. His research interests include school consultation, consultation training, and supervision. He is chair of the National Association of School
Psychologists Early Career Workgroup.
Allison J. Nebbergall, PhD, is a school psychologist for the KIPP New Orleans Schools
charter network, having earned her doctorate in school psychology from the University of
Maryland, College Park. She specializes in school and community-based program evaluation.
Diane Salmon, PhD, received her doctorate in educational psychology (with concentrations
in school psychology and human development) from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in
1989. She is a tenured faculty member at National Louis University in school and educational
psychology and interim director for research in the College of Education. Dr. Salmon’s research
focuses on relationships between social cognition, learning, and curriculum design.
Note: The authors report that to the best of their knowledge neither they nor their affiliated
institutions have financial or personal relationships or affiliations that could influence or bias
the opinions, decisions, or work presented in this article